5-Requirements/5-REQ-trace.md, before:

# `trace`: Trace requirements

Tracing requirements down to code level provides better overview of the project status,
and helps with impact analysis. It is also mandatory to achieve certain certifications.

Focus is on traces between requirements and code,
but a requirement hierarchy may be passed to *mantra*
to detect transitive relations between requirements and artifacts.

## `trace.id`: Use the requirement ID for traces

- **Parents:** [`trace`, `req.id`]

The requirement ID must be used for tracing, because the ID uniquely identifies a requirement.

## `trace.origin`: Origin of requirement traces

To know where a trace is located in a text file, the filepath and line number must be stored.
This information helps developers with project navigation, and is needed for *coverage* analysis
and certification.

The trace origin must be used as unique identifier of a trace,
because filepath and line number is the most basic form of location in a text file.

The line numbers must start at one for the first line in a text file.

**Note:** With *mantra*'s focus on traces between requirements and code, it is assumed that all traces will point to text files,
and therefore using filepath and line number as origin is feasible.

## `trace.mult_reqs`: Trace more than one requirement at same origin

More than one requirement may affect the same code.
Therefore, it must be possible to specify more than one requirement at the same origin.

## `trace.properties`: Properties of a trace

A trace may have properties that further describe the trace.
e.g. `verifies` and `satisfies`

### `trace.properties.verifies`: Mark a trace to verify a requirement

If a trace to a requirement has the property `verifies`,
*mantra* must add this trace to the group of information that verify the requirement.
Other information that verify a requirement are tests and reviews.

Typically, a trace with `verifies` property will be linked to a test.
In such a case, the trace must not be added to the group of information that verify the requirement,
because it is already verified by the test and would be redundant information.

### `trace.properties.satisfies`: Mark a trace to satisfy a requirement

If a trace to a requirement has the property `satisfies`,
*mantra* must add this trace to the group of information that satisfy the requirement.

Typically, a trace with `satisfies` property will be linked to code that implements the requirement.

### `trace.properties.others`: Other properties of a trace

*mantra* must be able to store trace properties that are not used by *mantra* itself,
because companies and projects may define their own custom trace properties.

## `trace.collect`: Collect requirements traces

It must be possible to collect requirements traces at least manually and semi-automatically,
because automated collection is not always possible.
Nevertheless, to improve the usability of *mantra*, trace collection should be automated as much as possible.

### `trace.collect.auto.filter`: Use ignore files to restrict the search for traces

Many repositories contain files and folders that should be ignored when searching for traces.
e.g. build outputs, git folder, ...

Most projects already use `.gitignore` files to exclude those files and folders.
Therefore, mantra must adhere to settings of a `.gitignore` file that is found in the current or parent directories of a repository.
Additionally, mantra must offer `.ignore` files to specify files and folders that must be ignored in addition to the `.gitignore` file.

Besides `.ignore`, it must also be possible to use `.traceignore` files to be more strict with ignores for mantra, when searching for traces.

**Note:** The `.git` folder must always be ignored, because it cannot hold valid traces.

### `trace.collect.auto.general`: Collect traces from text-based files

If no language specific feature is defined to trace requirements for a text-based file,
the following pattern must be detected:

```
[req(<requirement IDs>)]
```

**Note:** `<requirement IDs>` is used as placeholder for the actual IDs to trace with IDs being separated by `,` and optional whitespace characters.

**Examples:**

```
[req(req_id)]
[req(first_id, second_id)]
```

### `trace.collect.auto.ast`: Collect traces from an abstract syntax tree

**Parents:** [`trace.collect`, `trace.element`]

An AST should be used to restrict trace detection for programming languages.

**Rationale:**

Only requirements traces intended by developers should be detected, because falsely detected traces
result in unreliable trace data.
Therefore, traces found in commented code should be ignored or have restricted detection rules,
and language features should be used to further restrict trace detection.

See [requirement `lang`](5-REQ-lang) for language specific tracing conventions.

### `trace.collect.extern`: Add external traces

- **Parents:** [`trace.collect`, `exchange.traces.schema`]

It must be possible to manually add external traces to *mantra*, because annotations in code
might not be possible.
e.g. In case code was already certified before, adding annotations would change the code, which would require re-certification.

## `trace.special_chars`

In case a requirement ID has characters that are not allowed as part of identifiers in a programming language,
the ID may be wrapped in double quotes `"`.

**Example:**

```
[req("special-char-id.sub_id")]
```

## `trace.element`: Link trace to code element

- **Parents:** [`trace`, `report`, `coverage`]

A trace set in a programming language may be linked to an element,
to improve the expressiveness of the traceability report and mapping of traces to code coverage.

### `trace.element.ident`: Optional associated identifier of a trace

An identifier that uniquely identifies this element may be stored together
with the trace to improve the readability of the traceability report.

**Example:**

```rust
#[req(spanning_trace)]
fn some_fn() {
    // ...
}
```

### `trace.element.type`: Optional identifier type

The type of the element a trace is linked to should be stored in *mantra*,
to improve static test and coverage analysis. Especially important is the information
if a trace is placed on a test case.

For better interoperability, only the following types are allowed with the entry number representing their associated value:

1. `test` ... For a trace to a test case
2. `mod` ... For a trace to a module, package, or other general grouping elements
3. `fn` ... For a trace to a function or method
4. `var` ... For a trace to a variable or static
5. `const` ... For a trace to a constant
6. `type` ... For a trace to a type definition (e.g. `struct`, `enum`, `type`, `class`)
7. `field` ... For a trace to a field or property of a type
8. `trait` ... For a trace to a trait, interface, or other abstract type

The special type `other` with value `0` is used as a placeholder for elements that do not fit into the predefined categories.

### `trace.element.span`: Optional associated line span of a trace

A trace set on an element in a programming language affects all lines of the element.
This line span must be stored in *mantra* to connect code coverage data with traces.

**Example:**

The trace spans all three lines of the `some_fn` function.

```rust
#[req(spanning_trace)]
fn some_fn() {
    // ...
}
```

Commit message:

rename element.type to element.kind

5-Requirements/5-REQ-trace.md, after:

# `trace`: Trace requirements

Tracing requirements down to code level provides better overview of the project status,
and helps with impact analysis. It is also mandatory to achieve certain certifications.

Focus is on traces between requirements and code,
but a requirement hierarchy may be passed to *mantra*
to detect transitive relations between requirements and artifacts.

## `trace.id`: Use the requirement ID for traces

- **Parents:** [`trace`, `req.id`]

The requirement ID must be used for tracing, because the ID uniquely identifies a requirement.

## `trace.origin`: Origin of requirement traces

To know where a trace is located in a text file, the filepath and line number must be stored.
This information helps developers with project navigation, and is needed for *coverage* analysis
and certification.

The trace origin must be used as unique identifier of a trace,
because filepath and line number is the most basic form of location in a text file.

The line numbers must start at one for the first line in a text file.

**Note:** With *mantra*'s focus on traces between requirements and code, it is assumed that all traces will point to text files,
and therefore using filepath and line number as origin is feasible.

## `trace.mult_reqs`: Trace more than one requirement at same origin

More than one requirement may affect the same code.
Therefore, it must be possible to specify more than one requirement at the same origin.

## `trace.properties`: Properties of a trace

A trace may have properties that further describe the trace.
e.g. `verifies` and `satisfies`

### `trace.properties.verifies`: Mark a trace to verify a requirement

If a trace to a requirement has the property `verifies`,
*mantra* must add this trace to the group of information that verify the requirement.
Other information that verify a requirement are tests and reviews.

Typically, a trace with `verifies` property will be linked to a test.
In such a case, the trace must not be added to the group of information that verify the requirement,
because it is already verified by the test and would be redundant information.

### `trace.properties.satisfies`: Mark a trace to satisfy a requirement

If a trace to a requirement has the property `satisfies`,
*mantra* must add this trace to the group of information that satisfy the requirement.

Typically, a trace with `satisfies` property will be linked to code that implements the requirement.

### `trace.properties.others`: Other properties of a trace

*mantra* must be able to store trace properties that are not used by *mantra* itself,
because companies and projects may define their own custom trace properties.

## `trace.collect`: Collect requirements traces

It must be possible to collect requirements traces at least manually and semi-automatically,
because automated collection is not always possible.
Nevertheless, to improve the usability of *mantra*, trace collection should be automated as much as possible.

### `trace.collect.auto.filter`: Use ignore files to restrict the search for traces

Many repositories contain files and folders that should be ignored when searching for traces.
e.g. build outputs, git folder, ...

Most projects already use `.gitignore` files to exclude those files and folders.
Therefore, mantra must adhere to settings of a `.gitignore` file that is found in the current or parent directories of a repository.
Additionally, mantra must offer `.ignore` files to specify files and folders that must be ignored in addition to the `.gitignore` file.

Besides `.ignore`, it must also be possible to use `.traceignore` files to be more strict with ignores for mantra, when searching for traces.

**Note:** The `.git` folder must always be ignored, because it cannot hold valid traces.

### `trace.collect.auto.general`: Collect traces from text-based files

If no language specific feature is defined to trace requirements for a text-based file,
the following pattern must be detected:

```
[req(<requirement IDs>)]
```

**Note:** `<requirement IDs>` is used as placeholder for the actual IDs to trace with IDs being separated by `,` and optional whitespace characters.

**Examples:**

```
[req(req_id)]
[req(first_id, second_id)]
```

### `trace.collect.auto.ast`: Collect traces from an abstract syntax tree

**Parents:** [`trace.collect`, `trace.element`]

An AST should be used to restrict trace detection for programming languages.

**Rationale:**

Only requirements traces intended by developers should be detected, because falsely detected traces
result in unreliable trace data.
Therefore, traces found in commented code should be ignored or have restricted detection rules,
and language features should be used to further restrict trace detection.

See [requirement `lang`](5-REQ-lang) for language specific tracing conventions.

### `trace.collect.extern`: Add external traces

- **Parents:** [`trace.collect`, `exchange.traces.schema`]

It must be possible to manually add external traces to *mantra*, because annotations in code
might not be possible.
e.g. In case code was already certified before, adding annotations would change the code, which would require re-certification.

## `trace.special_chars`

In case a requirement ID has characters that are not allowed as part of identifiers in a programming language,
the ID may be wrapped in double quotes `"`.

**Example:**

```
[req("special-char-id.sub_id")]
```

## `trace.element`: Link trace to code element

- **Parents:** [`trace`, `report`, `coverage`]

A trace set in a programming language may be linked to an element,
to improve the expressiveness of the traceability report and mapping of traces to code coverage.

### `trace.element.ident`: Optional associated identifier of a trace

An identifier that uniquely identifies this element may be stored together
with the trace to improve the readability of the traceability report.

**Example:**

```rust
#[req(spanning_trace)]
fn some_fn() {
    // ...
}
```

### `trace.element.kind`: Optional identifier kind

The kind of the element a trace is linked to should be stored in *mantra*,
to improve static test and coverage analysis. Especially important is the information
if a trace is placed on a test case.

For better interoperability, only the following kinds are allowed with the entry number representing their associated value:

1. `test` ... For a trace to a test case
2. `mod` ... For a trace to a module, package, or other general grouping elements
3. `fn` ... For a trace to a function or method
4. `var` ... For a trace to a variable or static
5. `const` ... For a trace to a constant
6. `type` ... For a trace to a type definition (e.g. `struct`, `enum`, `type`, `class`)
7. `field` ... For a trace to a field or property of a type
8. `trait` ... For a trace to a trait, interface, or other abstract type

The special kind `other` with value `0` is used as a placeholder for elements that do not fit into the predefined categories.

### `trace.element.span`: Optional associated line span of a trace

A trace set on an element in a programming language affects all lines of the element.
This line span must be stored in *mantra* to connect code coverage data with traces.

**Example:**

The trace spans all four lines of the `some_fn` function,
including the attribute macro.

```rust
#[req(spanning_trace)]
fn some_fn() {
    // ...
}
```
