**keywords:** search, references-list

# What is the *references* list good for?

The *references* list is needed to keep track of the phase a requirement is in.
Reference counts are used to provide more granularity about the implementation state of a requirement.

It was decided to store *references* lists in the wiki to be visible to all that have access to the wiki.
In addition, every requirement has its own list, to directly see the phase a requirement is in.

# Structure of the *references* list
## Why multiple entries?

It was chosen to use a *references* list, because a system/project may support different version lines,
and requirements may differ between those version lines.

An alternative would have been to create full wiki-branches that are kept in sync with code-branches.
However, this creates more effort when changing requirements affecting all branches, because they must be updated in all wiki-branches.
With the assumption that only few requirements are specific to version lines, and as consequence specific to branches,
this alternative seemed infeasible.  

## Why only branches?

The *references* list **only** contains branch counts, because a list entry for every release would
make the list unreadable after a few months with tens of releases.

As a better alternative for releases, *mantra* should allow creating *release*-reports that
contain all *active* requirements for the release.

## Why do counts propagate to higher-level requirements?

High-level requirements most often affect a wider area in a system/project.
This makes it hard to add traces for them in the implementation and tests.
However, it is reasonable to assume that a high-level requirement is at least
partially implemented if at least one sub-requirement is traced.
Therefore, reference counts of sub-requirements are added to the reference count of the high-level requirement,
because a requirement is considered *active* if it has at least one reference in the implementation or tests.
